---
layout: post
title:  When did I consent to paying for your PhD?
author: Jonathon Blonchek
categories: jekyll update
---

The House's version of what they’re calling The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act includes a repeal of Section 117(d)(5) in the US Tax Code. This paragraph is titled "Special Rules for Teaching and Research Assistants.” It stipulates that if the students are engaged in teaching or research activities, they are subject to the same exemptions provided by the section for tuition reduction. A tuition reduction is "any reduction in tuition provided to an employee of an organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) for the education... at such organization of such employee, or any person treated as an employee (or whose use is treated as an employee use).” 

Schools offer a tuition waiver in return for your work as a teacher or researcher. Under Section 117(d)(5), the value of the waiver isn’t counted as taxable income. Under the new law, students will no longer receive this exemption. Students and institutions have been quite vocal about their discontent with the change. They claim no money ends up in student pockets, so they should not have to pay taxes on money they’ve never seen. It begs the question, why does the means by which you are paid hold any weight when determining the taxes you owe? It shouldn’t - and the government, outside of the exclusions currently under scrutiny, agrees. You already must report the exchange of property or services as taxable income. 

Consider a world without this stipulation - it would be in the best interest of all people and businesses to no longer deal in dollars. In an exchange of goods and services with no physical dollars exchanged, the government could not capture the inherent value of any transaction, and income tax revenue would quickly approach zero. Federal spending could never be sustained without regulation. 

The question then becomes, why are certain exchanges excluded from taxation? As with virtually all exceptions in the tax code, government officials pick and choose causes they believe will stimulate growth and, in the more sinister cases, those they believe will contribute to the greater good. The spider web of loopholes and incentives makes the tax system into a game. Unfortunately, it is a game where few can afford the buy-in and even fewer actually win. 

[Opponents](http://nyti.ms/2AM090S) to removing the exemption from graduate students claim that research going on at universities drives important advancements in science and technology that contribute to society on the whole. It’s hard to refute those claims, but I struggle to see why this research has to occur at a university. Consider a student studying for their PhD is making $30,000 a year in stipend, and receiving a tuition waiver of $50,000 for services as a graduate teacher. In a free market economy such as ours, the rational student would shop around for buyers of the research they intend to conduct. They could expect private companies to offer at least an $80,000 salary, no teaching requirement, and probably a slew of benefits not afforded to graduate students. I’d be hard-pressed to find any 20-something who wouldn’t openly accept an offer of such magnitude. So why don’t all graduate students do this? It’s probably not a lack of intellect, which may lead to the conclusion that these students aren’t actually worth the price universities are “paying”. Look at it from another angle - why would corporations not be heavily recruiting these students? Private companies reap the benefits of the research through university partnerships without adding anyone extra to payroll. A win-win!

Instead of arguing whether their very clear income is taxable or not, graduate students should start asking the right questions to the right people. Am I worth $80,000 a year? Why does tuition have to be so high? Who can pay me what I deserve? Surprisingly enough, the answers aren’t always found in Washington DC.
